Why did i do this?  BASIC is pretty much a dead language.

Without getting into too many details, i fell ill while driving across
country, and was prescribed a medication that left me unable to operate
heavy machinery.

It was illegal for me to drive for about 2 weeks.  With no other options,
i booked myself into a hotel room, and ordered a lot of pizza.

A friend suggested i take on some kind of programming project, and
suggested a compiler for his favorite flavor of BASIC.

As a seasoned programmer, i had cut my teeth on old Apple ][ and Atari
BASIC, and it had been a while since i'd written a compiler.  i thought
if i started out simple, i could refresh my memory, and then later apply
some of these things to the project my friend was interested in.

However, i needed some things to make the project interesting to me.

i'd long wondered why most programming languages are based on English
keywords [1], and what it would look like to try to support multiple
spoken languages.  With the advent of Unicode, this shouldn't be a big
deal, right?  Turns out it took a lot of effort for me to find RE/flex,
a version of lex/flex that even understood Unicode.

i'd also had a long standing problem with how computers represented
floating point numbers.  Having participated in many coding competitions,
both as a competitor and as a judge, my favorite class of problems to trip
people up with was to give them something involving floating point maths
where rounding errors were certain to accumulate and shoot them in the
foot. i wanted to do something with rational numbers, no rounding errors.

The authors of the ECMA-116 BASIC standard recognized rounding problems
with floating point numbers, and tried to fix it by introducing fixed
point numbers into the language, but even that is not always satisfactory
[2].  i had always wanted to do a math type based on rational fractions,
and wanted to see what kinds of problems that fixed, and what kinds of
problems it introduced.

So there i was, locked in a hotel room, scratching my weird coding itches,
hopped up on some strange med that messed with my sense of balance,
and this is what happened.

i mostly focused on ECMA-55, because it had a small number of keywords,
and i did not want to get stuck in a translation tar pit.  my first two
"languages" were "reverse" (all the keywords are backwards) and "emoji",
where keywords were arbitrary series of Unicode emoji characters (i needed
to be able to test Unicode input).  i needed to be able to try switching
back and forth with english, reverse, and emoji.  i also developed the
"Rational" number type at this time.

i did steal a few features from ECMA-116, as well as some other flavors
of BASIC, and dropped or enhanced some ECMA-55 features because they
seemed dirt stupid easy to do at the time.

i also looked into later versions of BASIC, such as ANSI X3.113-1987,
Full BASIC, True BASIC, etc...  They all suffered from the "second system"
effect, and were too complicated for a quick 2 week project.  In fact
it is doubtful ANYONE has ever fully implemented these specifications [3].

So that's how we got here.  Right now i'm mostly concerned with correct
keyword translations, which i think can only be done correctly by
crowdsourcing, and i have no idea how to make this toy popular enough
for that.

As a teacher who influenced me greatly in my early years once told me,
"a piece of art is never finished, it is simply abandoned."

i'm not giving up just yet though. i'll likely putter around with
translations for a while longer.  but the core of the thing, the language
interpreter, is pretty much done.

Footnotes:

[1]
Coding Is for Everyone—as Long as You Speak English
https://www.wired.com/story/coding-is-for-everyoneas-long-as-you-speak-english/

[2]
WHY FIXED POINT WON'T CURE YOUR FLOATING POINT BLUES
https://accu.org/journals/overload/18/100/harris_1717/

[3]
Full BASIC
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Full_BASIC
